.. _ss:times_code:

TIMES Model generator
=======================

TIMES (The Integrated MARKAL-EFOM System) is a bottom-up optimization model generator for energy-environment systems analysis at various levels of spatial, temporal, and sectoral resolutions [#Loulou2016a; #Loulou2016]. The TIMES code, written in GAMS and available under an open-source license [#IEA-ETSAP2020a], is developed and maintained by the Energy Technology Systems Analysis Programme (ETSAP)\ [#]_ , a Technology Collaboration Programme (TCP) of the International Energy Agency (IEA), established in 1976. TIMES models can have single or several regions and typically are rich in technology detail, used for medium- to long-term energy system analysis and planning at a regional, national, or global scale.

TIMES is a linear optimization, techno-economic, partial-equilibrium model generator that assumes perfectly competitive markets and perfect foresight. Model variants enable myopic foresight, general equilibrium, stochastic programming, and a variety of multi-objective function options. The standard objective function maximizes the net total surplus (the sum of producers’ and consumers’ surpluses), which, in a perfect market with perfect foresight, equates to maximizing the net present value (NPV) of the whole energy system, maximizing societal welfare. Profits, taxes, and subsidies are internal transfers, i.e., occurring within the economy, that do not change the NPV (albeit taxes and subsidies can be included to influence the optimization). It calculates the energy system specification that minimizes discounted total energy system costs over the model time horizon, which is the sum of investments, fixed and variable costs, fuel import costs, and export revenues for all the modeled processes, less potential salvage values of investments for which the whole lifetime goes beyond the model time horizon.

The user inputs the following to the model generator:

- Reference Energy System (RES): The process-flow architecture of economic sectors and energy flows (commodity) between processes (technology), which consume and produce energy, energy service demands and/or other commodities such as environmental emissions (including greenhouse gasses) and other materials. The base-year energy flows are calibrated to national energy balances.
- Energy service demands: The physical services required by the economy and society for mobility, heat, communications, food, etc., which drive energy demand.
- Energy supply curves: The quantities of primary energy resources (e.g., wind power) or imported commodities (e.g., oil, gas, bio-energy) available at specific cost points for differing quality and quantity of energy commodities.
- Techno-economic parameters of existing and potential future energy technologies: Economic parameters including current and projected future investment and fixed/variable costs and efficiencies of technologies for energy supply (e.g., solar PV panels, transmission and distribution infrastructure, biorefineries, hydrogen production) and energy demand (e.g., electric vehicles, natural gas boilers, carbon capture and storage); technological parameters including transformation efficiency, availability factor, capacity factor, and emissions factor.
- User constraints: Any combination of linear constraints (including fixed, maximum, or minimum bounds on growth, investment, or shares) on technologies or fuels. These are typically used to simulate real-world technology constraints or policy scenarios. A typical user constraint for decarbonization analysis is limiting total annual or cumulative CO\ :sub:`2`\  emissions to model energy system pathways that meet a national decarbonization target.

TIMES outputs the optimal investment and operation level of all energy technologies that meet future energy service demands at the least cost, while respecting user constraints. The model also produces corresponding energy flows, emissions, and marginal prices of energy and emissions flows.

.. [#] https://iea-etsap.org/
