Model description
===== ============

Plain English description
-------------------------

 The TIMES-Ireland Model produces energy system pathways for energy supply and demand in Ireland consistent with either a carbon budget or a decarbonisation target. It calculates the lowest cost configuration of energy fuels and technologies which meet future energy demands, while respecting technical, environmental, economic, social, and policy constraints. Key inputs and constraints include primary
 energy resource availability and costs, the technical and cost evolution of new mitigation options, and maximum feasible uptake rates of new technologies. Alternatively, TIM can be used to assess the implications of certain policies, namely regulatory or technology target setting (for example, biofuels blending obligation or the sales/stock share target for electric vehicles).

TIMES modelgenerator
---------------------

TIMES (The Integrated MARKAL-EFOM System) is a bottom-up optimisation model generator for energy environment systems analysis at various levels of spatial, temporal, and sectoral resolutions (Loulou et al., 2016a, b). The TIMES code, written in GAMS and available under an open-source licence (IEA-ETSAP, 2020), is developed and maintained by the Energy Technology Systems Analysis Programme (ETSAP; https://iea-etsap.org/, last access: 18 May 2022), a Technology Collaboration Programme (TCP) of the International Energy Agency (IEA), established in 1976. TIMES models can have single or several regions
 and are typically rich in technology detail, used for mediumto long-term energy system analysis and planning at a regional, national, or global scale. TIMES is a linear optimisation, technoeconomic, partial
 equilibrium model generator which assumes perfectly competitive markets and perfect foresight. Model variants enable myopic foresight, general equilibrium, stochastic programming, and a variety of multi-objective function options. The standard objective function maximises the net total surplus (the sum of producers’ and consumers’ surpluses) which, in a perfect market with perfect foresight, equates to maximising the net present value (NPV) of the whole energy system, maximising societal welfare. Profits, taxes, and subsidies are internal transfers, i.e. occurring within the economy, that do not change the NPV (albeit that taxes and subsidies can be included to influence the optimisation). It calculates the energy system specification which minimises the discounted total energy system costs over the model time horizon, which is the sum of investments, fixed and variable costs, fuel import costs, and export revenues for all the modelled processes less the potential salvage values of investments for which the
 whole lifetime goes beyond the model time horizon. The user inputs the following to the model generator: https://doi.org/10.5194/gmd-15-4991-2022– Reference energy system (RES), which is the process
flow architecture of economic sectors and energy flows (commodity) between processes (technology), which consume and produce energy, energy service demands, and/or other commodities such as environmental emis
sions (including greenhouse gases) and other materials. The base year energy flows are calibrated to national energy balances.– Energy service demands are the physical services required by the economy and society for mobility, heat, communications, food, etc., which drive energy demand.– Energy supply curves are the quantities of primary energy resources (e.g. wind power) or imported commodities (e.g. oil, gas, and bioenergy) available at specific costs points for differing quality and quantity of energy commodities.– Technoeconomic parameters of existing and potential
 future energy technologies are economic parameters including current and projected future investment and fixed/variable costs and efficiencies of technologies for energy supply (e.g. solar PV panels, transmission and distribution infrastructure, biorefineries, and hydrogen production) and energy demand (e.g. electric vehicles, natural gas boilers, and carbon capture and storage).
 Technological parameters include the transformation efficiency, availability factor, capacity factor, and emissions factor.– User constraints, which can be any combination of linear constraints (including fixed, maximum, or minimumbounds on growth, investment, or shares) on technologies or fuels. These are typically used to simulate real-world technology constraints or to simulate policy scenarios. A typical user constraint for decarbonisation analysis is limiting total annual or cumulative CO2 emissions to model energy system pathways that meet a national decarbonisation target. TIMESoutputs the optimal investment and operation level of all energy technologies which meet future energy service demands at least cost, while respecting user constraints. The model also produces corresponding energy flows, emissions, and marginal prices of energy and emissions flows.
 
